Franklin and Religion
Monica David
While Benjamin Franklin’s religious and philosophical beliefs are not clearly spelled out either in his Autobiography or in his more public writings, the general tenor of his statements on these subjects make it clear that he was much influenced by the prevailing spirit of Enlightenment philosophy and attitudes towards religion. The beginning of Enlightenment philosophy can arguably be traced to the birth of modern science and the scientific method in the Renaissance. Francis Bacon (1561-1626), an English peer, philosopher, and scientist, advocated the investigation of Nature through scientific experiment and the use of induction. The intellectual freedom of such an attitude was soon mirrored in an analogous movement towards greater liberty in investigating questions of religious and philosophy. This marked a new development in the history of thought, since the preceding centuries had been dominated—to make a sweeping but still useful generalization—by Scholastic philosophy, a kind of thinking seriously circumscribed by rigid theological boundaries. While Scholasticism built on the thinking of ancient philosophers, especially the writings of Aristotle, the combination of a somewhat paralyzing reverence for these texts with a desire to remain theologically orthodox resulted in a respect for revelation and tradition which seemed, at times, to leave human reason a poor second best.
	One of the most prominent features of Enlightenment philosophy, on the other hand, was its simultaneous confidence in and skepticism about the powers of human reason. Thinkers such as John Locke (1632-1704) and David Hume (1711-1776) stressed the formative role of custom and habit in mental process, lamented the folly of religious persecution, and demonstrated the folly and universality of “certainty” on religious and cultural matters. Indeed, the human tendency to confuse what is familiar with what is right or true opened a new field of tolerance and intellectually coherent uncertainty which many important figures of the time—and Franklin among them—found congenial.
	Even Franklin’s frequently comedic comments on the fallibility of human reason in the course of his Autobiography demonstrate his adoption of, or at least comfort with, Enlightenment attitudes. The rise or resurgence of satire in the eighteenth century is not coincidental—a lessened reverence for authority and an openness to experiment and observation cleared a space for a simultaneously amused and investigative literary and mental stance. Franklin’s many interests and abilities thus align him, and his writings, with a wide range of related Enlightenment theories and practices. It is probable that his frequent changes of location and the travels which so characterized his early life tended to make him an ideal candidate for such ideas and attitudes; a variety of scene and of people, and freedom from the intellectual stagnation often resulting from life-long residence in one place, likely gave him the clear-eyed attitude of an outside observer. Not surprisingly, the same symbolic figure of the displaced, cosmopolitan observer might stand as a visual representation of the Enlightenment philosopher and scientific investigator. Again, Franklin’s keen interest in the changing scenes surrounding him and his curiosity in the “way things work” is demonstrated in his scientific investigations, as his efforts to improve daily life through new inventions matches the Enlightenment faith in the possibility of improving human life here and now.
