History of Printing in America
Andrew Michael
“Printing” serves as a valuable point of entry to studying Franklin, both in the life of the man and in the life of the autobiography itself. On one hand Franklin was the most important printer living in America during the eighteenth century, while on the other the history of the collection of documents that would become his Autobiography has taken on a life of its own since their original creation, spawning multiple editions, translations, and variations on the original manuscripts. To fully understand Franklin we must as a starting point understand the profession to which much if his life was devoted.
To begin, we must consider what was involved in the act of printing in the Eighteenth century; what exactly did a printer “do?” There were several jobs required for printing in this time period, though all of them were incredibly labor-intensive and required long hours to create even a single page in a weekly newspaper. First, a compositor gathered the type and arranged it into sentences and lines (set backwards, as printing reversed the images). Then once these lines were finished they were set into wooden cases called galleys and secured into the press. Then the type was covered in ink by a man using two ink balls to carefully and evenly spread a combination of varnish and lampblack on all of the lines. Once paper is inserted into the press a long lever connected to a screw pressed the paper onto the now-inserted type block with around 200 pounds of pressure to leave an impression. Working together a crew on a single press could make an impression every 15 seconds or so, while their work-day lasted around 14 hours on average. In total, every page of a weekly newspaper required around 25 hours of hand labor to produce and print the required amount of copies.
Another question is “what did the printers print?” While this may seem to be a basic question, we must always remember how slim the profits were and how risky the actual act of printing was at this time. For one point of reference we may look to the work of the historian Thomas Carlyle in 1827 who, looking back over the last century, remarked that the three great elements of modern civilization were gunpowder, printing, and the Protestant religion. We may trace this sentiment back to the very start of printing in the New World as early American printers based their entire businesses around the printing of religious texts and governmental documents. Increase Mather (the father of the Cotton Mather referenced often in this text) for instance was a prodigious religious and philosophic author of the late seventeenth century who had upwards of 130 books and pamphlets of his own work printed over the course of his life. However, the real bread and butter of colonial printing houses were the documents necessary to the governments of the early American colonies. Starting in the late seventeenth century the business of printing houses was primarily the printing of the acts, laws, and regulations regarding the new colonies. Later as these businesses expanded they began printing almanacs, newspapers, and currency, and only after finally finding solid ground in the ever-expanding cities of the New World was it deemed worth the risk to print creative works. It is for this reason that many of the books in America during this early period were leftovers from England, as while the London bookshops might not find a market for these works those in Boston or New York most certainly could. It was in this context also that James and later Benjamin Franklin established their businesses, and why close relations with the governments of their respective towns were so important.
The driving force behind all of these topics however is, of course, money, and more specifically the costs and risks of printing in the new world. To start, the average cost of starting a printing shop between 1724 and 1753 can be estimated at around 95-125 pounds sterling. While a direct conversion is difficult due to the large gap in time between then and now, a good estimate would be that 100 pounds then amounts to around $20,000 now. It is for this reason, then, that William Keith’s offer to loan Franklin money for a press and type in 1724 was such a surprise. While this isn’t exactly a fortune, it is still a large sum of money. A farmer in Virginia might make 10 pounds per year while a skilled craftsman could make anywhere from 30 to 100 pounds annually. Furthermore, the risk of actually printing something in the period was also very high due to the costs associated with the endeavor and the uncertain markets. We’ve already mentioned the prevalence of religious and governmental texts as necessary to a functional colony in these early days, but the primary reason they made up the largest portions of a printer’s business was because they provided a reliable source of steady income to the printers of this period. While a book might not sell (often resulting in the printer either breaking even or losing money) religious or governmental texts were softball profits; they always sold and often came with money up front to help alleviate printing costs. For this reason, make note of how Franklin associates himself with both the governments near his print shops and the communities surrounding them. While Franklin’s genius is a major factor in regards to the growth of his business we must not forget how pointedly Franklin inserted himself into the everyday workings of the places he inhabited (hence his governmental positions, numerous social clubs, and texts on social workings such as firehouses or his Plan for Moral Perfection to be found at the end of the Autobiography). Printing in this period can thus be understood as an incredibly time consuming profession that required hard work and the ability to perform under great pressure and monetary risk, thus making Franklin’s success in the profession that much more impressive as he worked to become the most recognizable printer of his century.
