
Cotton Mather’s Influence on Benjamin Franklin

Cotton Mather, born in Boston, Massachusetts in 1663 to one of the city's most influential families, became arguably the most prominent minister in the American colonies. Indeed, his influence was so widely felt he could be described as one of the major transatlantic figures of the time. Ordained at Boston's North Church, he served there as minister for the entirety of his career. However, Mather's influence was not only limited to religion. He was politically active, and he studied science as well, eventually gaining admittance to London's Royal Society (Hall).  
A prolific author, he published approximately 380 texts, including Magnalia Christi Americana (on the movement of Christianity from Europe to America) and Bonifacius, Essays to do Good. By the end of his life, Mather’s influence on Christianity in the colonies laid the groundwork for religious figures such as Jonathan Edwards. Mather died in February 1728 at the age of 65 (Hall).
Mather’s works were wide-reaching, so it is unsurprising that another major figure of the time, Benjamin Franklin, felt his influence—most notably through Mather’s Essays to do Good. While working as an apprentice in his brother’s print shop in 1722, sixteen-year-old Franklin wrote essays under the pseudonym of Silence Dogood—the latter taken directly from Mather’s title “Essays to do Good.” The character Franklin assumed was a middle-aged minister’s widow who wrote on a variety of social topics such as politics, fashion, and education. Franklin cryptically slid these essays under the door of his brother’s business, hoping for publication. His ploy worked, and Franklin's pseudonymous works were published until October of 1722 (“Benjamin Franklin, The ‘Silence Dogood’ Essays”). Some critics have opined the pseudonym and some of the essays were actually a mockery of Mather since the initial run of essays from Silence Dogood appeared at approximately the same time as widespread debates surrounding inoculation, a practice opposed by James Franklin, Benjamin’s brother and owner of The New England Courant.  
For his part, Mather was a strong proponent of inoculation to the extent that in 1721, Mather and Dr. Zabdiel Boylston inoculated over 200 people during a smallpox epidemic, in the process eliciting a certain amount of public outcry (Hall). At the same time, James Franklin published numerous articles against inoculation in the Courant. Years later, and after his own child contracted smallpox, Franklin changed his position on inoculation, regretting his failure to inoculate his son (Franklin 170).
Though Mather and Benjamin Franklin held opposing views upon various matters, there is no doubt that Mather exerted major influence upon Franklin. For instance, Essays to do Good provides practical tips for how to “do good” for the “Saviour, and for His People in the world.” The book is short and easily read, and its practicality and warmth made it popular throughout the colonies and in England (Hall).  Franklin appears to have extrapolated not only the form, but the ethical substance from the book, publishing his own Poor Richard's Almanac, an annual journal consisting of practical tips, witty sayings, and household advice. In his Autobiography, he notes that his father’s library held a copy of Essays to do Good, and that reading it “perhaps gave me a Turn of Thinking that had an Influence on some of the principal future Events of my Life” (Franklin 58). In a letter written to Mather’s son Samuel in 1773, Franklin acknowledged Mather’s influence: 
When I was a boy, I met with a book, entitled “Essays to do good,” which, I think, was written by your father. It had been so little regarded by a former possessor, that several leaves of it were torn out: but the remainder gave me such a turn, for thinking, as to have an influence on my conduct through life; for I have always set a greater value on the character of a doer of good, than any other kind of reputation; and if I have been, as you seem to think, a useful citizen, the public owes the advantage of it to that book. (Franklin 232)
Ellen French





Works Cited
“Benjamin Franklin, The ‘Silence Dogood’ Essays.” The Open Anthology of Literature in English, 
virginia-anthology.org/benjamin-franklin-silence-dogood-number-1/.
Franklin, Benjamin. The Life of Benjamin Franklin. M. Carey, 1817.
Franklin, Benjamin, and Leonard Woods Labaree. The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin. 2nd 
ed. Yale University Press, 2003. 
Hall, Michael G. "Mather, Cotton (1663–1728), minister in America and author." Oxford Dictionary 
of National Biography. 2004-09-23. Oxford University Press. Date of access 27 Mar. 2018.
